---
layout: post
title: "Differentiation"
author: "Karthik"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,sample]
---

$${ \underline{\textbf{References}} }$$ 

* “Undergraduate Analysis” by Lang.
* “Foundations of Applied Mathematics, Vol 1” by Humpherys, Jarvis, Evans.  
* “Analysis Vol 2” by Amann, Escher.  
* “Calculus on Normed Vector Spaces” by Coleman. 
* “Differential Calculus” by Cartan.


**ROUGH NOTES (!)**    
Updated: 29/5/24 

Sections: [Continuous linear maps](#1.); [Differentiation](#2.); [Differentiation of maps ${ \mathbb{R} ^n \to \mathbb{R} ^m }$](#3.);  [Integration of maps ${ f : [a, b] \to E }$](#4.); [Mean value theorem](#5.); [Second derivative](#6.); [Third derivative](#7.); [Higher derivatives](#8.); [Taylor’s theorem](#9.)


###### 1.

$${ \underline{\textbf{Continuous linear maps}} }$$ 

**Thm** [Continuity of a linear map]: Let ${ E, F }$ be normed vector spaces and ${ \lambda : E \to F }$ a linear map. Now  

$${ \begin{align*} &(\lambda \text{ is continuous}) \\ \iff &\Bigg( \sup _{\lVert u \rVert = 1} \lVert \lambda(u) \rVert = \sup _{v \neq 0} \frac{\lVert \lambda(v) \rVert}{\lVert v \rVert} < \infty \Bigg). \end{align*}  }$$    

**Pf**: ${ \underline{\Leftarrow} }$ Say ${ C = \sup _{v \neq 0} \frac{\lVert \lambda (v) \rVert}{\lVert v \rVert} < \infty .}$ Now ${ \lVert \lambda (x) - \lambda(y) \rVert }$ ${ = \lVert \lambda (x - y) \rVert }$ ${ \leq C \lVert x - y \rVert }$ for all ${ x, y \in E.}$ If ${ C = 0 }$ the map is anyways ${ \lambda = 0 ,}$ and if ${ C > 0 }$ the map is uniformly continuous.    
${ \underline{\Rightarrow} }$ Say ${ \lambda }$ is continuous. So there is a ${ \delta > 0 }$ such that ${ x \in E,  \lVert x \rVert \leq \delta }$ implies ${ \lVert \lambda (x) \rVert < 1 . }$ Now for any ${ x \in E, x \neq 0 }$ the stretch 

$${ \begin{align*} \frac{\lVert \lambda (x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} &= \frac{1}{\delta} \bigg\lVert \lambda \bigg( \underbrace{\frac{x}{\lVert x \rVert} \delta} _{\text{of norm } \delta} \bigg)  \bigg\rVert \\ &< \frac{1}{\delta}, \end{align*} }$$

so ${ \sup _{x \neq 0} \frac{\lVert \lambda(x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} < \infty.   }$ 

**Eg** [A linear map which isn’t continuous]: Consider the space of polynomial functions on ${ [0, 1 ] }$ 

$${ V = \lbrace p \in C[0, 1] : p \text{ is polynomial} \rbrace \subseteq C [0, 1]  }$$

and the differentiation operator 

$${ D : V \to V, \quad p \mapsto p ^{’} .  }$$ 

Linearity of ${ D }$ is clear. But for every positive integer ${ n }$ 

$${ \sup _{v \in V, v \neq 0} \frac{\lVert D(v) \rVert}{\lVert v \rVert} \geq \frac{\lVert D(x ^n) \rVert}{\lVert x ^n \rVert} = n,  }$$ 

so ${ D }$ isn’t continuous. 

**Obs**: Let ${ F }$ be a normed vector space. Any linear map ${ \lambda : \mathbb{R} ^n \to F }$ is continuous.    
**Pf**: For any ${ x \in \mathbb{R} ^n, }$ 

$${ \begin{align*} \lVert \lambda (x) \rVert &= \bigg\lVert \sum _{i=1} ^{n} x _i \lambda ( e _i ) \bigg\rVert \\ &\leq  \sum _{i=1} ^{n} \vert x _i \vert \lVert \lambda (e _i) \rVert  \\ &\leq \lVert x \rVert _{u} \sqrt{\sum _{i=1} ^n \lVert \lambda(e _i) \rVert ^2 }  ,   \end{align*} }$$

so ${ \lambda }$ is uniformly continuous. 

**Def** [Space of continuous linear maps]:    
Let ${ E, F }$ be normed vector spaces. The space of continuous linear maps from ${ E }$ to ${ F }$ is written 

$${ L(E, F) := \lbrace \text{continuous linear maps } E \to F \rbrace.}$$

It is a vector space. Such spaces can be given the (submultiplicative) norm 

$${ \lVert \lambda \rVert := \sup _{ x \neq 0} \frac{ \lVert \lambda (x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} < \infty, \quad \text{ for } \lambda \in L(E, F). }$$ 

Here, if ${ F }$ is complete so is ${ L(E, F) .}$ 

**Thm** [Completeness of ${ L(E, F) }$]:    
Let ${ E, F }$ be normed vector spaces. Now 

$${ F \text{ is complete} \implies L(E, F) \text{ is complete}. }$$ 

**Pf**: Say ${ F }$ is complete. Let ${ (\lambda _n) }$ be a Cauchy sequence in ${ L(E, F). }$ We are to show a ${ \lambda \in L(E, F)}$ for which ${ \lVert \lambda _n - \lambda \rVert \to 0 }$ as ${ n \to \infty . }$    
Pick an ${ x \in E, x \neq 0 .}$ The sequence ${ (\lambda _n (x)) }$ is Cauchy, because 

$${ \lVert \lambda _m (x) - \lambda _n (x) \rVert \leq \lVert \lambda _m - \lambda _n \rVert \lVert x \rVert  }$$ 

and ${ (\lambda _n) }$ is Cauchy.  As ${ F }$ is complete, the Cauchy sequence ${ (\lambda _n (x) ) }$ converges to a limit, which we can call ${ \lambda (x) .}$ We now have the pointwise limit 

$${ \begin{align*} &\lambda : E \to F , \\ &x \mapsto \lambda(x) := \lim _{n \to \infty} \lambda _n (x) . \end{align*} }$$ 

It suffices to show 

$${ \text{To show: } \lambda \in L(E,F), \quad \lVert \lambda _n - \lambda \rVert \to 0.  }$$ 

That ${ \lambda }$ is linear is clear: 

$${ \begin{align*} \lambda (\alpha   x  + \beta y) &= \lim _{n \to \infty} \lambda _n (\alpha x + \beta y) \\ &= \lim _{n \to \infty} (\alpha  \lambda _n (x) + \beta \lambda _n (y))  \\ &= \alpha \lambda (x) + \beta \lambda (y).  \end{align*}  }$$ 

We are to show ${ \lambda }$ is continuous, that is ${ \sup _{x \neq 0} \frac{\lVert \lambda(x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} < \infty .}$    
Let ${ x \in E, x \neq 0 .}$ Note  

$${ \frac{\lVert \lambda _n (x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} \leq \lVert \lambda _n \rVert . }$$ 

 Since ${ (\lambda _n) }$ is bounded by some ${ C > 0  }$ (because it is Cauchy), we have 

$${ \frac{\lVert \lambda _n (x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} \leq C .  }$$ 

Since ${ \lVert \lambda _n (x) \rVert \to \lVert \lambda (x) \rVert }$ (because ${ \vert \lVert \lambda _n (x) \rVert - \lVert \lambda (x) \rVert \vert}$ ${ \leq \lVert \lambda _n (x) - \lambda (x) \rVert \to 0 }$), letting ${ n \to \infty }$ gives 

$${ \frac{\lVert \lambda  (x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} \leq C .   }$$

So ${ \sup _{x \neq 0} \frac{\lVert \lambda(x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} < \infty }$ as needed. 

It is left to show 

$${ \text{To show: } \lVert \lambda _n - \lambda \rVert \to 0 \text{ as } n \to \infty. }$$ 

Let ${ \epsilon > 0 .}$ Since ${ (\lambda _n) }$ is Cauchy, there is an ${ N }$ such that ${ \lVert \lambda _m - \lambda _n \rVert < \epsilon }$ whenever ${ m , n \geq N .}$ Equivalently 

$${ \frac{\lVert \lambda _m (x) - \lambda _n (x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert}  < \epsilon \text{ whenever } m, n \geq N \text{ and } x \in E, x \neq 0 . }$$

Fix a choice of ${ x \neq 0, m \geq N }$ and let ${ n \to \infty .}$ This gives 

$${ \frac{\lVert \lambda _m (x) - \lambda (x) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert} \leq \epsilon  \text{ for every choice of } m \geq N, x \neq 0 . }$$ 

Equivalently

$${ \lVert \lambda _m - \lambda  \rVert \leq \epsilon \text{ for every choice of } m \geq N.  }$$ 

So ${ \lVert \lambda _m - \lambda \rVert \to 0 }$ as ${ m \to \infty, }$ as needed. ${ \blacksquare }$ 

 Completeness of ${ L(E, F) }$ is important when considering integrals of maps ${ f : [a, b] \to L(E, F) .}$ 

**Thm** [Continuity of a bilinear map]:    

Let ${ E, F, G }$ be normed vector spaces and ${ \lambda : E \times F \to G }$ a bilinear map. 

Equip ${ E \times F }$ with say the sup norm ${ \lVert (x, y) \rVert := \max \lbrace \lVert x \rVert, \lVert y \rVert \rbrace }$ or the norm ${ \lVert (x,y) \rVert _{u} := \sqrt{\lVert x \rVert ^2 + \lVert y \rVert ^2 } .}$  (They are equivalent norms as ${ \lVert (x, y) \rVert \leq \lVert (x, y) \rVert _u \leq \sqrt{2} \lVert (x, y) \rVert }$). For concreteness, the sup norm. 

Now 

$${ \begin{align*} &(\lambda \text{ is continuous}) \\ \iff &\Bigg(\sup _{\lVert u \rVert = \lVert v \rVert = 1} \lVert \lambda (u, v) \rVert = \sup _{u \neq 0, v \neq 0} \frac{\lVert \lambda (u, v) \rVert}{\lVert u \rVert \lVert v \rVert} < \infty \Bigg) .  \end{align*}  }$$    

**Pf**: ${ \underline{\Rightarrow} }$ Say ${ \lambda }$ is continuous. So there is a ${ \delta > 0 }$ such that ${ \lVert (x, y) \rVert \leq \delta }$ implies ${ \lVert \lambda (x, y) \rVert < 1 .}$ Now for ${ (x, y) \in E \times F }$ with ${ x \neq 0, y \neq 0 }$ the stretch 

$${ \begin{align*} \frac{\lVert \lambda(x, y) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert \lVert y \rVert} &= \frac{1}{\delta ^2} \bigg\lVert \lambda \bigg( \underbrace{\delta \frac{x}{\lVert x \rVert}, \delta \frac{y}{\lVert y \rVert}} _{\text{of norm } \delta}  \bigg)\bigg\rVert \\ &< \frac{1}{\delta ^2}.   \end{align*}  }$$ 

So ${  \sup _{x \neq 0, y \neq 0} \frac{\lVert \lambda (x, y) \rVert}{\lVert x \rVert \lVert y \rVert} < \infty. }$  

${ \underline{\Leftarrow} }$ Say ${ C =  \sup _{u \neq 0, v \neq 0} \frac{\lVert \lambda (u, v) \rVert}{\lVert u \rVert \lVert v \rVert} < \infty. }$ Now 

$${ \lVert \lambda(u, v) \rVert \leq C \lVert u \rVert \lVert v \rVert \text{ for all } (u, v) \in E \times F,  u \neq 0, v \neq 0 .}$$ 

As ${ \lambda (u , 0) = 0 }$ because ${ \lambda(u, 0+0) = \lambda(u, 0) + \lambda(u, 0) ,}$ and ${ \lambda(0, v) = 0 ,}$ we have 

$${ \lVert \lambda (u, v) \rVert \leq C \lVert u \rVert \lVert v \rVert \text{ for all } (u, v) \in E \times F .}$$

We are to show continuity of ${ \lambda .}$    
Say a sequence ${ (x _n , y _n) \to (x, y) }$ in ${ E \times F.}$ We are to show ${ \lambda(x _n, y _n) \to \lambda(x, y) .}$ We see  

$${ \begin{align*} \lVert \lambda(x _n, y _n) - \lambda(x, y) \rVert &\leq  \lVert \lambda(x _n, y _n) - \lambda(x _n, y) \rVert + \lVert \lambda(x _n, y) - \lambda(x, y) \rVert \\ &= \lVert \lambda (x _n, y _n - y) \rVert + \lVert \lambda (x _n - x , y) \rVert \\ &\leq C(\lVert x _n \rVert \lVert y _n - y \rVert + \lVert x _n - x \rVert \lVert y \rVert) \to 0,    \end{align*} }$$ 

so ${ \lambda(x _n, y _n) \to \lambda(x, y) }$ as needed. ${ \blacksquare }$ 

A similar observation holds for multilinear maps. 

For normed spaces ${ E _1, \ldots, E _n ; F }$ the set ${ L(E _1, \ldots, E _n ; F) }$ of continuous multilinear maps ${ E _1 \times \ldots \times E _n \to F }$ is a vector space and given the norm 

$${ \lVert \lambda \rVert := \sup \lbrace \lVert \lambda (x _1, \ldots, x _n) \rVert : \lVert x _1 \rVert = \ldots = \lVert x _n \rVert = 1 \rbrace < \infty . }$$

Here, if ${ E _1 = \ldots = E _n = E , }$ we write the space as ${ L ^n (E; F) . }$ For now the focus is on continuous linear maps. 
